#title Oz/Mozart Documentation

Strasheela uses the multi-paradigm programming language Oz as its user-interface and for its implementation. Oz (and its implementation Mozart) comes with extensive documentation. This page lists sources which are of particular importance for Strasheela. 

  [[http://www.mozart-oz.org/][The Mozart Programming System]]	-- the central Oz/Mozart web site. 


* Introductory Material

  [[http://www2.info.ucl.ac.be/people/PVR/book.html][Concepts, Techniques, and Models of Computer Programming]] -- a very good programming textbook using Oz for its examples (may rival the classical [[http://mitpress.mit.edu/sicp/full-text/book/book.html][Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs]] by Abelson and Sussman). 

  [[http:www.mozart-oz.org/documentation/tutorial/index.html][Tutorial of Oz]] -- an introduction to Oz and Mozart.

  [[http:www.mozart-oz.org/documentation/fdt/index.html][Finite Domain Constraint Programming in Oz. A Tutorial]] -- an introduction to constraint programming in Oz.  

  [[http://www.mozart-oz.org/documentation/fst/index.html][Problem Solving with Finite Set Constraints in Oz. A Tutorial]] -- an introduction to finite set constraint programming in Oz.

  [[http://www.mozart-oz.org/documentation/][Mozart Documentation]] -- provides further tutorials.


* Reference  Material    

  [[http://www.mozart-oz.org/documentation/][Mozart Documentation]] -- the entry point to the voluminous Oz documentation set. 

  [[http://www.vendian.org/oz/wiki/index.cgi?VirtualManual][A Virtual Manual for Mozart/Oz]] -- a wiki attempting to integrate the many sources of Mozart/Oz documentation.


* Publications 

  [[http://books.google.com/books?id=BYXNltNPDGAC&pg=PR1&ots=XEZwT73n-z&dq=Programming+Constraint+Services&sig=vfakyMOLFnvtSWHV3_aUGo94iX8][Programming Constraint Services]] -- this book explains the space-based constraint model, the operational foundation of Strasheela (the original [[http://web.it.kth.se/~schulte/paper.html?id=Schulte:PhD:2000][PhD thesis]] is still available as well).

  [[http://www.mozart-oz.org/papers/][Selected Research Papers on Oz]] -- lists many further related publications.


* Contributed Mozart Packages 

  [[http://www.mozart-oz.org/mogul/info/duchier/select.html][Select]] -- selection constraints for finite domains and for finite sets.
  
  [[http://www.mozart-oz.org/mogul/doc/tack/iozsef/iozsef.html][IOzSeF]] -- a toolbox for building custom search engines, which also provides many ready-made search engines. 

  [[http://home.gna.org/xrilpoz/][XRI and LP]] -- a constraint system over real numbers and a linear programming solver.

; semiring / soft constraints

  [[https://gna.org/projects/geoz/][GEOZ]] -- a [[http://www.gecode.org/][Gecode]] port to Mozart (work in progress).

  [[http://www.mozart-oz.org/mogul/][MOGUL: the MOzart Global User Library]] -- a repository of Mozart packages.


; TODO: 
; introduce and recommend ozfind, flymake for oz, (oz-completion-ui) 

