#title Research Papers on Strasheela 

* Publications

The following publications describe concepts of Strasheela.

** General

  Anders, T., E. Miranda (2011). [[http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1978809][A Survey of Constraint Programming Systems for Modeling Music Theories and Composition]]. *ACM Computing Surveys*. 43(4).

  Anders, T. (2011). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/Anders-VariableOrderings-2011-draft.pdf][Variable Orderings for Solving Musical Constraint Satisfaction Problems]]. In G. Assayag, C. Truchet (Eds.), *Constraint Programming in Music*. Wiley. 

  Anders, T., E. Miranda (2009). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/AndersMiranda-CMR-2009-draft.doc][Interfacing Manual and Machine Composition]]. *Contemporary Music Review*. 28(2).

  Anders, T., E. Miranda (2010). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/AndersMiranda-CMJ-2010.pdf][Constraint Application with Higher-Order Programming for Modeling Music Theories]]. *Computer Music Journal*. 34(2).

  Torsten Anders, Eduardo R. Miranda (2008). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/Anders-ConstraintApplicators-ICMC2008.pdf][Higher-Order Constraint Applicators for Music Constraint Programming]]. In *Proceedings of the 2008 International Computer Music Conference*. Belfast, UK.  

  Torsten Anders (2007). [[http://strasheela.sourceforge.net/documents/TorstenAnders-PhDThesis.pdf][Composing Music by Composing Rules: Design and Usage of a Generic Music Constraint System]]. PhD thesis, Queen's University, Belfast. 

  Torsten Anders, Christina Anagnostopoulou, and Michael Alcorn (2005). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/TorstenAnders-MOZ2004.pdf][Strasheela: Design and Usage of a Music Composition Environment Based on the Oz Programming Model]]. In Peter van Roy, editor, *Multiparadigm Programming in Mozart/OZ: Second International Conference, MOZ 2004*, LNCS 3389. Springer-Verlag.
  
  Torsten Anders (2002). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/TorstenAnders-ICMC2002.pdf][A wizard's aid: efficient music constraint programming with Oz]]. In *Proceedings of the 2002 International Computer Music Conference*. Goteborg, Sweden.


** Extensions 

  Anders, T., E. Miranda (2011). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/Anders-Microtonal-PNM2011/MicrotonalHarmony.html][A Computational Model for Rule-Based Microtonal Music Theories and Composition]]. *Perspectives of New Music*. 48(2).

  Torsten Anders, Eduardo R. Miranda (2008). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/Anders-RealtimeCP-ICMC2008.pdf][Constraint-Based Composition in Realtime]]. In *Proceedings of the 2008 International Computer Music Conference*. Belfast, UK.  

  Torsten Anders (2007). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/TorstenAnders-MotifModel-MCM2007.pdf][A Model of Musical Motifs]]. In *International Conference Mathematics and Computation in Music*. Berlin, Germany.


** Applications 

  Anders, T., E. Miranda (2009). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/Anders-SchoenbergHarmony-SMC2009.pdf][A Computational Model that Generalises Schoenberg’s Guidelines for Favourable Chord Progressions]]. In *6th Sound and Music Computing Conference*. Porto, Portugal. 

  Graham Percival, Torsten Anders, George Tzanetakis (2008). [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/publications/Percival-icmc08.pdf][Generating Targeted Rhythmic Exercises for Music Students with Constraint Satisfaction Programming]]. In *Proceedings of the 2008 International Computer Music Conference*. Belfast, UK.  


#presentations
* Presentations and Teaching

Strasheela concepts are also explained in the following presentations. 

  Music Constraint Programming. In lecture series *Interactive Intelligent Systems Workshop* (AINT503), University of Plymouth, 2007/08. 

  These four lectures teach the use of constraint programming for computer-aided music composition. The first two lessons introduce fundamental concepts of music theory and music representation. In the remaining lessons, the field music constraint programming is briefly surveyed and the composition system Strasheela is presented. Audience: MSc students in computing and related fields.

  Slides: [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/teaching/TorstenAnders-AINT503-e1.pdf][lecture 1]], [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/teaching/TorstenAnders-AINT503-e2.pdf][lecture 2]], [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/teaching/TorstenAnders-AINT503-e3.pdf][lecture 3]], [[http://cmr.soc.plymouth.ac.uk/tanders/teaching/TorstenAnders-AINT503-e4.pdf][lecture 4]].

